This is a test. Today's date is March 10th, 1981.
This is an interview with Dean George Shelton.
This
is an interview. Well, George Shelton, Dean of the
College of Veterinary Medicine, today's date is
Tuesday, March 10th, 1981. Let's start with your
personal background. Can you tell us about your
early years in Steavenville, Texas? Yes, I grew up
in Steavenville, Texas in the Depression years
and on a small farm south of Steavenville and
completed high school at Steavenville High
School. And then attended what was then a branch of
Texas A&M University called John Tarleton
Agricultural College in those days. And you tell
us about your parents. Let's slow down here for a
minute. All right. My parents were farm people.
And my father was a small farmer, mixed farming, a
little bit of everything, dairy and row crops,
peanuts.
my mother was just a farm wife, housewife. I had one
sister who was seven years younger than, five
years younger than I, and she also completed high
school at Stephenville and then went on to John
Tarleton for two years. What kind of education did
your parents have? My parents were, had only a
grade school education. They completed Oh,
something like seventh grade, something of that
period. They had lived in
the Stephenville area most of their life. My
mother came from East Texas, grew up around
Sulphur Springs, and then they had lived on farms
around Stephenville for most of their life. No,
you grew up during the Depression. What was the
impact of the Depression on you and on your family?
Well, it was a fairly drastic impact, although in
those days it wasn't as severe as a Depression
would be today because we lived on a 200-acre farm
and we weren't affected very much by the energy
problem because we didn't have all that much
energy. In the early years, we didn't even have
electricity. And then after the REA came into the
communities, we did get electricity. But in the
very heart of the Depression, we were still using
draft animals, horses and mules to farm with. And
so while the depression hurt as far as having money
for capital development. It didn't really hurt
all that much as far as our life was concerned. We
always had food and we didn't have much money, but
then very few people did. We always had the
essentials, food, clothing, and shelter.
Clothing might not have been too good, but we
always had it. And so our life was not drastically
affected by the Depression, except there just was
no growth, no capital development. And every year
was sort of like the last one. The worst year I can
remember was 1934,
the drought hit so bad in that area of Texas, well
all over Texas. That year was rough. Did you grow
anything? We grew almost nothing except some
vegetables and foodstuff, but we had nothing to
sell that year. There was no sales because we
didn't produce anything. It was lucky to keep
going. It was lucky to keep fed, probably. And
fortunately, we lived in a sandy area where we did
raise some vegetables, and we were able to get a
little bit of a hay crop before it got so terribly
hot and dry. So we survived 1934, but it was a bad
year. That was the year that the federal
government began to start so many social or
socioeconomic programs to one that I remember
that had some bearing on me as a small boy was the
government bought cattle under some kind of a
federal program. They actually would take so many
of the cattle that the farmer had and they just dig
long trenches somewhere in the countryside and
shoot the cattle. and pay something like $8 or $10 a
piece for them. And while that today, it reduced
the supply of cattle and gave the farmer a little
bit of capital. By today's standards, nothing.
But in those days, $10 was Kind of an unbelievable
amount of money. Concerning bacon, went for a
nickel a pound. Yeah. So the prices, too, on the
other end of the farmer, they must have just really
hurt you as far as the devaluation of prices for
selling your farm crops. Value, almost.
Products were just not worth much. But
surprisingly enough, people did survive.
because their standards of living were so much
lower than today. I didn't expect much. Today,
I suppose anyone my age that remembers the Great
Depression, and I was small, but I remember it very
vividly. Of course, we didn't really get out of it
until about 1938 to 40. But I can remember the years
of 34, 35 very well. And anyone that remembers
those days can't help but suddenly sometimes stop
and think, what would happen if that happened
today? Where would people go? You know, when,
what, 80% or 70% to 80% of our people live in huge
urban areas like Houston, Dallas, and Los
Angeles. What would those people do? I really
don't know. Now in those, in 1934, I suppose 70 or
80% of the people lived in small towns and rural,
and on little farms. And I suppose in that time, we
still probably had better than six to seven
million farms. But the call farms wouldn't be
farmed by today's standards, but
at least the people were out where they could get
food. The people that were heard in the 32 to 36 era
were the people in New York City and Chicago and the
bread lines. They had no food. No jobs, no money.
What influence did your parents have on you?
I guess, well, a very, very positive influence
because my parents were always dedicated to the
importance of education. They believed that a
young person, myself and my sister, the only
chance that we had for a good life or a better life
was through education. Even though they didn't
have any. Even though their education was
relatively poor, relatively limited. They both
were very, very devoted to the importance of
education. How can you account for that? Was it
part of the American dream? I think it was part of
the American dream for that time, and I don't think
my parents were all that much different from their
peers, their contemporaries. I think that people
on the small farms of Middle America in those days
valued education. Most of them had
people the age of my mother and father, a high
school education was considered pretty
outstanding. That's certainly better than a
college degree today, in that day. So while they
didn't have a lot of education, they had enough to
know the importance I guess that's how I would put
it. They were hardworking people, Christian
people dedicated to the basic values, moral
values of America. And they were upward motivated
in the sense that they wanted a better life for us
than they had. So yes, they had a positive
influence, very definitely.
My father was a strict disciplinarian who, while
he was always reasonable and understanding with
me, I knew what he
expected of me, too.
So they had a very positive effect. And is that why
you decided to go to college then? I guess I never
thought about anything else. I never recall ever
having any other goal. Now, I didn't know that I
would go on to finish a professional degree and a
PhD and all that kind of stuff. You know, I didn't
know what that was in those days. But I always knew
that I was going to get a college degree. I'd finish
high school, and somehow I'd get a college degree.
So when you finished high school, there really
wasn't another alternative for you. I never
considered one. You had just decided, yeah. I
never considered one. I just immediately
enrolled there. Of course, we had the advantage of
being able to live at home and go to that junior
college for two years, which I did. I lived at home.
I didn't move to the city. I continued to work on the
farm. I'd get up and hand milk. In those days... a
dozen cows before going to school in the morning.
After school, I went home. Those two years of
college were sort of an extension of high school
for me because I would go,
I pretty much followed the same pattern of life
those two years of college that I did in high
school. And I continued to work and to earn as much
of my way as I could. I worked on the, I generally
worked on the farm in the summer, but summer of 1940
and 41, I did work for the REA. Really? Through the
summer to earn a little extra money. Putting up
telephone poles, wires, and stuff like that?
Yeah. Bringing electricity out to the farms?
That's right, yeah. That was in adding there.
Maybe not all. These were just extra jobs. Yeah, a
government job. Was a government job hard to get?
Well, they had loosened up. They weren't so hard to
get by 40, 39, 40, 41. No, they had been. Well,
they'd been impossible to get back in the early
30s. But by the late 30s and early 40s, no, you could
get jobs. You know, I saw the Grapes of Wrath about a
month ago again, and the whole idea of the
government was a very benevolent type
government, and today we have so many politicians
blaming Washington for this and blaming
Washington for that. Would you agree with that?
Did it seem back then that it was a positive force in
American history? I thought so. Because having
having a memory over the spectrum of years and the
federal programs,
I'm sort of a pro-Roosevelt person. I realize that
on through the next 40 years some of the federal
programs and the idea that the government could do
everything is carried way too far. But I still take
issue with people that are too critical of
Roosevelt for the, what do you call it, the Great
Society, or that wasn't it, but... New Deal. The
New Deal, yeah. The Great Society was LBJ. Yes,
that's LBJ. But it's all a continuation of the
spectrum. And the New Deal, as far as I'm
concerned, was a very positive and a very good
force. And I would tend to think that if Roosevelt
was the kind of man that would have seen, after a
while it was going too far. Because I was a
respecter of Roosevelt. I thought he was a
brilliant man. I realize that there's some things
that history maybe shows that he might have been
wrong and maybe did wrong. But I certainly thought
that his New Deal was a positive effort, and
overall it was positive. There's so many things
like the GI Bill of Rights. When you try to balance
the strong against the good against the bad, boy,
it wins out hands down. And I tend to think the New
Deal did, too. The government effort to get the
country moving forward again. I surely see that It
was overdone, and it's been carried too far in
places. And of course, we all know that some of
those federal programs like the REA and several
things, you know, perhaps Roosevelt tried to
stack the Supreme Court. I guess he did, you know.
And he probably went too far in some of those
because that might have been almost dictatorial.
There was a need to move the country forward in
1932. Yeah, for sure. By some means
or other. Now when you were at junior college, did
you have any idea that you wanted to become a
veterinarian? Yes, yes I did. There
was a veterinarian in Stephenville by the name of
Vern Scott who had been to my father's farm all
through the years since I was big enough to
remember. He was a very strong force on so many
young men in the area of Stephenville in those
years. I suppose contributed to a dozen or 20 young
people coming to Texas A&M to study veterinary
medicine. Was he an A&M grad? No, he wasn't. Well,
let me back up. He was an A&M graduate, but he
received his veterinary degree from the old
private school in Kansas City, Kansas City
Veterinary College. But Dr. Scott had finished
A&M in animal husbandry. And that was along about
the time the new school was started here. And for
whatever reason, he did not go to veterinary
school here, but went to Kansas City. But he was an
A&M grad and a strong supporter of A&M. And he was a
good image, a flamboyant, strong personality,
strong will. And he taught animal science or
animal husbandry at Tarleton. Oh, he did. So he was
a vet and he taught. He was a practicing
veterinarian. He was a practicing veterinarian
and taught part time there in the school. He had
what in those days was an ideal job. He had the best
of all worlds. Yes, he was. So he was a strong
influence. What's your background? Did that play
a role since you came from a farm? I don't know what
hit you. I'm not sure. For you, what about your
background? Was that another factor? Oh, I think
so, yes. I was going to spend my life somewhere in
the agricultural industry, either in the animal
science or plant science, somewhere. I knew that
from, you know, I'm sure that was a factor. then Dr.
Scott probably was a positive influence to go into
the animal side of things. And even in 1941, when I
started to Tarleton, perhaps I
think I wanted to be a veterinarian then, but I
didn't know if I could ever get through. I didn't
know what the finances would be. I knew it would be
terribly expensive By my standards, by the monies
I had, it would be difficult to come to Texas A&M. So
in 1941, I took the pre-veterinary curriculum at
Tarleton, but I didn't know if I'd ever get through
or not. I hoped to, and I planned to, but those days
were a little different than today because of the
loan programs that are available to young people.
We didn't have any loan programs available to us.
So we had to earn our own way. Our parents had to find
the money. I didn't know whether I could get
through or not. My goal was sort of a short term, to
get through Tarleton, finish the pre-vet
requirement, and then cross the next bridge when I
got there. And when you were at Tarleton, was that
for two years? I know you went in the Army Air Force
in 1942. So were you done with your pre-vet
curriculum? Yes. See, I started at Tarleton in the
fall of 1941, and the war broke out in December.
They immediately switched to an accelerated
program. Oh, I see. So by December of 1942, I had
essentially completed two years' work.
I looked then at the possibility of coming on to
Texas A&M. They had at that time what was called an
ASTP program, Army Specialized Training
Program. And I looked into that, came to Texas A&M,
talked to some of the young veterinary students at
the time, and everything was so terribly
uncertain. In December 1942, they had stopped
enlistments. You could no longer enlist in any of
the armed services. Everybody was being drafted
because they were getting lopsided situations.
Some people wanted to enlist in this force or that
force, so you had to go on through the draft, and I
elected to, then I went back home at Christmas
time, and I elected to go on in the draft because I
didn't think I could ever get through here. People
were being called up almost every day. Oh, really?
It was a demoralized crew, you know. You didn't
know if you'd be in school one more week or one more
year. Now, some students did stay in school and did
finish. But I elected to go on. So I went home about,
oh, I don't know, I suppose it was 15th or 20th of
December. And I went down to the draft board and
told them, you know, I wasn't going to apply for an
extension because I wasn't going on to A&M. You
could apply for an extension. a delay, really, I
say extension, a delay of the draft. So I went home
and told them I wasn't going to. They were happy to
hear that. Yeah, they announced at Tarleton just
before Christmas that anybody that was drafted
over the holidays would not have to take final
exams. And I thought, well, if I'm going on this
service, I don't want to take the final exam. So I
went out to the draft board and told them I wasn't
going to ask for a delay. So, man, they moved fast. I
went to Camp Barkley, I believe it was what they
called it, in Abilene and was inducted into the
Army on December 29th. They didn't delay. It's
kind of unbelievable. How'd you get in the Army Air
Force? Did you apply for that? They assigned me.
Oh, they just assigned you. What was your job? We
had no choice. You didn't know if you were going to
infantry or Navy or Marines or where. So we went to
Camp Walters, I think about the 3rd of January of
1943. We were inducted and sent home for three days
or so, a weekend kind of thing, and then reported to
Camp Walters. I went through an induction center
there, and the first thing I knew, I'd been signed
to the Air Force. But I had no idea where I was going.
Did they train you, or did they give you a job? No, we
went through a brief orientation at Camp Walters,
sent me to Shepherd Field, Texas, to the Air Force
base. and a very brief basic training program
there, something like two months. And then I went
to Scottfield, Illinois for radio operator
gunnery school. I had applied for pilot's
training, but failed to pass the physical exam
because of an eye problem, a little bit of a
defective eye problem. I don't know whether that
was really it or whether they had more people
applying for pilot training than they needed.
There probably were quite a few. Yes. So anyhow, I
went on to Scott Field in radio operator gunnery
school. Completed there with
radio operator mechanic school, they called it.
And then from there to gunnery school in
Las Vegas, Nevada. and then to what they call a
replacement training unit for gunnery crew or
aircraft crew along by November of that year. And
then I was ready to take a place in replacement crew
training. See, the war was hot and heavy in both the
Pacific and in Europe by that time, late 1943,
early 1944. And so I went through replacement
training unit in Myrtle Beach, or in Columbia and
Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, and then was
shipped to the Pacific in early 1944. Whereabouts
in the South Pacific? Well, almost the whole
thing. I started, of course, I reported to the
Solomon Islands in Guadalcanal area, then was
immediately moved to New Guinea and went through
all the New Guinea campaigns. or most of it, and
then on up through the Philippines, and I
completed my tour of duty just about the time the
Philippine War was over. It was all pretty well
under control, and I left the Philippines in late
April, early May 1945, and everybody- Did you
occupy Japan? I didn't go on to Japan. They sent me
home, and then I was ready to be reassigned to, I had
flown on medium bombers in all the New Guinea,
Philippine campaign. And so when they sent me home
for what they call rest and rehabilitation leave,
and I would have been reassigned to B-29s. Those
were the big superfortress. They dropped the
bombs. Yeah. And then in August, 1945, when the war
ended, I'm sure I would have reported to B-29
training program. If the war had not ended in
Europe, I would have reported by the middle of 1st
of September. And so you didn't have any leave for
about two years then? You had no leave for about two
years? Oh, minor leave, a week or so. But you never
got home for a couple of years, and that's why they
sent you back. No, they gave me a week, about a week
or ten days, when I came back from Pacific. That was
in May, June 1945. Then they assigned me to
Ellington Field in Houston. I was more or less in a
delayed program there. They were thinking about
what they're going to do with it. Yeah, well, of
course, they anticipated. They knew the war was
over against Germany, and they anticipated
another year and a half. Oh, yeah. I think the
feeling, at least it got down to us, the feeling was
that the war with Japan would last another year, 18
months. And I certainly didn't agree with it. I had
been through all the New Guinea and Philippine
campaign, and they didn't quit. You just had to
kill the last one. And I assumed it would take a
year,
18 months. Now when you came back from the war, were
your plans to go to Texas A&M? Or how did that- You
know, it's kind of ironic there. When I came back in
45, I really never thought much about it because I
didn't really think the war was over. So I never
gave much thought. And it wasn't until about
mid-August that I did, because I think the war
ended in Japan about the 14th of August, something
like that. And all of a sudden, what am I going to do
here? I hadn't really thought much about it. Oh, I
guess sometimes in bull sessions in the barracks
or somewhere, I'd like to. At that time, they began
to talk about the GI Bill. Well, if I can qualify for
the GI Bill, I think I'll go to Texas A&M and try to
get in vet school. And so as late as the middle of
August, I hadn't thought much about it. And then
all of a sudden, I did. So when the war ended, we
still assumed that it would be several months
before we could be mustered out. word to use then.
And I really recall a time or two thinking that I'd
come up to Texas A&M, I was down there in Houston,
and talk to the school, but things began to move so
fast, you know, after that, and all of a sudden
realized that, man, we may get out of here. So the
war ended on August the 14th, and I was discharged
on September 22nd. That's tremendous. It started
at the Veterinary School here on September 27th.
Really? But tell me about when you came up and
getting admitted in five days. Well, I had kind of
a, I guess I was lucky. Number one in the mustering
out process, I had been through a lot of battle
zones and had flown in several battle areas. I'd
been, I'd received, as everybody in the Air Force
did, a number of medals and awards and so forth that
they gave you points for. Yeah. So suddenly, I
found I had enough points to be mustered out early.
And so I concentrated on getting out for a few days.
And then... When they discharged me, my home was in
Stephenville, and I was released at Ellington
Field. And I had purchased a little car back in the
summer, that summer after coming back from
Europe, I mean the Pacific. I purchased a little
car. It was an old 36 Plymouth, I remember it. And I
couldn't keep it running because there was
something wrong with it all the time. It had
150,000 on it, I guess. But anyway, I got it to run
enough that I started home. So I stopped by here at
the college on the way home. And that would have
been like the 23rd or so. And went over to see Dean
Marsteller, who was dean at the college at the
time.